Atanasio Tzul, Lucas Aguilar,
and the Indian Kingdom
of Totonicapan

David J. McCreery

Chiapas was part of the captaincy general of Guatemala, which
included all of Central America down to Panama and was a dependency
of the viceroyalty of New Spain, or Mexico. Central Americans by and
large did not join in the early stages of the Mexican independence
struggles led by Fathers Miguel Hidalgo and José Maria Morelos (1810—
1815). When Agustin Iturbide signed an independence treaty with the
Spanish viceroy in 1821, Central Americans chose to remain part of an
independent Mexico. As emperor (1821-1823), Iturbide unwisely proved
insensitive to their local concerns, and Central Americans seized the
opportunity of the 1823 revolt against Iturbide to declare their indepen-
dence from Mexico. The province of Chiapas, however, remained with
Mexico rather than join the other Central American republics.

Atanasio Tzul’s history allows us to examine the role that the indig-
enous population played during the independence epoch. A member of
the Indian aristocracy, Tzul had been confirmed by the Spanish as a
leader of his town. As such, he shared with Spanish officials responsibility
for collecting taxes and tribute. Increasing resistance by the Indians to
paying tribute led Tzul and Lucas Aguilar, an Indian commoner, to rebel
against the Spanish in 1820. Over the years, their rebellion gained fame
as part of the independence struggles and as an example of an indigenous
people who established their own king and nation.

In his essay, David McCreery points out that the Indians who named
Tzul as their king did not necessarily intend to reject their other, more
distant, king in Spain. Their rebellion resembled a colonial uprising against
a specific grievance more than it did a revolt for independence. The
pardon of Tzul and Aguilar in 1821 may have reflected Spanish uncer-
tainty, as McCreery argues, but it also was consistent with the imperial
policy of dispensing justice mildly to Indians in order to avoid creating
martyrs. The lack of unity among Tzul’s Indian villages reveals that, like
the Creoles, Indians had different reasons for becoming royalists or
patriots. Perhaps this disunity is another clue to Spain’s ability to dominate
millions of Indians with a minimum of force. Their divisions meant that
whether they fought to uphold the Spanish empire or to forge a creole
republic, indigenous peoples would continue to be despised and granted
only limited citizenship privileges.

David McCreery is associate professor of history at Georgia State
University and director of the Latin American Studies Consortium in the
University System of Georgia. He has published numerous articles on
indigenous communities and the social and economic history of
nineteenth-century Guatemala. McCreery is the author of Development
and the State in Reforma Guatemala (1983). He is at work on a study
of rural Guatemala from 1760 to 1940.

It was on the Friday after the arrival. of
the papers of the Constitution that they
celebrated the coronation of Atanasio
Tzul. There were public displays of joy,

. nine days of bull fights, the music of
drums and salvos of rockets. Tzul pre-
sented himself in public dressed as a Span-
ish soldier, with a three-pointed hat such
as the Spanish use, a sword, a medal at
his throat, and a staff [vara] of office taken
from the gobernador. The town hall was
adorned with hangings, and he and Lucas
Aguilar watched the festivities from a
throne set under a canopy taken from the
church.

With the possible exception of the Tzotzil-Tzeltal uprisings that
swept highland Chiapas in the years 1708-1713, the tumulto
(uprising or riot) at Totonicapan in 1820 is the best known of
the colonial Central American Indian revolts. In the past, interest
has focused on Atanasio Tzul, “the Indian King,” and on possible
connections between the rebellion and the events that led the
next year to independence from Spain. In fact, Tzul, while not
a minor actor, was never the “motor” of this revolt, and the
tumulto itself stemmed less from aspirations to political inde-
pendence than from demands for relief from the abuses of the
Crown and of Indian officials. If it stands out from among similar
protests for its duration and for the crowning of a “king,” it is
otherwise not untypical of a number of late colonial uprisings
among the area’s indigenous populations. The turbulent condi-
tions of the times and the nature of the rebels, despised and
illiterate Indian peasants, limit the detail available about individ-
uals. But an examination of what the historian can recover
concerning the people, the communities, and the conflicts that
resulted in the Indian kingdom of Totonicapan reveals much
about the social and political tensions surfacing in the last years
of Spain’s American empire.

By spring 1820 almost all of Spanish America was in turmoil.
Independence movements raged in Mexico and in South Amer-
ica, and this violence lapped the borders of a still peaceful but
hardly tranquil Central America. To a large extent, events in
Spain had set these American uprisings in motion. Following its
defeats in the Seven Years’ War (1756-1763), the Spanish Crown
initiated sweeping reforms in the New World meant to tighten
control of its empire and raise revenue to finance improved
defenses. State agents had managed to put these reforms only
partially in place, however, when Spain found itself again sucked
into war after 1793, this time as the somewhat reluctant ally of
revolutionary France. When the alliance threatened to crumble
under the pounding of British guns, Napoleon, in May 1808,
kidnapped the Spanish king, invaded Spain, and put his brother
Joseph on the throne. The Spanish people fought back. They
established a regency for the abducted king and called a meeting
of a representative assembly, the Cortes, which, for the first time,
included delegates from the American colonies.

In 1812 the Cortes, dominated by an urban bourgoisie under
the influence of the Enlightenment and aware that the survival
of the Spanish state rested on New World loyalty, produced a
constitution that limited the king’s power and offered equal status
to most Americans and Spaniards. King Ferdinand VII swore
obedience to the constitution from his exile in France, but when
the British finally restored him to the throne in 1814, he reneged.
Like the Restoration French Bourbons, he learned nothing and
forgot nothing. Yet the drama continued, for in January 1820
an army revolt led by Liberals forced him to accept for a second
time the 1812 constitution. As each twist in Spanish politics
intersected with the peculiar local conditions of different areas
of the Americas, individual colonies opted for independence.

Central America appeared to be an exception to this general
movement toward independence. The Spanish called the isthmus
“Guatemala,” and it was a subdivision of the viceroyalty of New
Spain (Mexico) to the north. The Hidalgo revolts, which mingled
race war and desire for independence, broke out in central New
Spain in 1810 and simmered for a decade but did not spread to
Guatemala. In Guatemala a series of strong governors, aided by
a tiny Spanish and criollo (whites born in the New World) elite,
struggled successfully to keep a lid on the discontent of the Indian
and casta (mixed blood) majority. The immediate conflict was not
so much about independence as the reluctance of the lower orders
to pay the taxes that supported the regime. Guatemala’s indig-
enous population by law was liable for a head tax called tribute.
So too, in theory, were the castas, but most ignored the tax, and
the state made little effort to collect from them. Tribute in
Guatemala took a number of forms in the three hundred years
following the conquest in 1521. For example, until 1738 Indian
women as well as men had to pay the tax, and then, for a time,
unmarried and married men paid, but by the late eighteenth
century, tribute fell chiefly on married Indian men aged eighteen
to fifty. If by law tribute was a tax on individuals, in practice the
state assessed it by community, on the basis of rough, and often
out-of-date, population counts. Local Indian leaders had the
responsibility for collecting and delivering the levy in twice-per-
year installments to the Spanish. The Indians originally paid the
tax in kind, using cacao or cotton or whatever else was the local
product of commercial value, but in 1747 the Crown commuted
all such payments to coin, which had an important, if unantici-
pated, effect. Over the course of the centuries following the
institution of tribute, the money value of many of the commodities
used by the communities to pay the tax had changed. When the
new law converted these items to their eighteenth-century cash
equivalents, some villages found themselves owing much more,
often by two or three times, than that paid by other towns of
similar size. Whole regions saw taxes go up dramatically. Not
surprisingly, this produced complaints and calls for reform.

Crown officials began to study the problem in the 1780s and,
with customary dispatch, in 1801 adopted a plan for the nivelacién,
or the leveling, of tributes. This involved new censuses and a
standardization of the amount due at sixteen reales, or two pesos,
per year for each Indian male. In fact, “leveling” was not exactly
what occurred. Those communities already paying more than
two pesos per tributary continued to be liable for the larger
amount; those paying less had their taxes “leveled” up to the
new figure.

The increases that resulted from nivelacién were quite substan-
tial in many instances, especially among the Indians of the western
highlands and the Verapaz. According to calculations by the
Guatemalan historian Manuel Fernandez Molina, these increases
amounted to:

District % Increase District % Increase

Suchitepéquez 9.21% Chimaltenango 30.29%
Chiquimula-Zacapa 10.84% Totonicapan-

Huehuetenango 37.57%
Quezaltenango 26.25% Amatatitlan-

Sacatepequez 40.08%
Solola 28.91% Verapaz

Government efforts to implement the leveled taxes touched
off a storm of protest. A major riot broke out in Coban in the
Verapaz in 1803, driving crown officials from the town and
requiring regular troops and ladino* militia from the capital to
put it down. Few towns ever had paid tribute promptly, and most
now dragged their feet even more. In these years, too, they came
under other, extraordinary demands on their limited resources.
Between 1801 and 1807 the state took over and called in loans
owed to town cajas de la comunidad (community reserve funds)
and to the church and sent the proceeds to Europe to help
finance the wars. This consolidacién forced individuals to sell
properties or liquidate businesses, often at a loss, to make good
their debts, and it drained more than | million pesos from the
local economy. Repeatedly, too, crown officials simply hecharon
la mano (stuck their hand) in community reserve funds, to meet
real or manufactured emergencies, and on several occasions they
demanded “voluntary” contributions to the war effort. In these
years as well, disastrous locust plagues swept up the west coast
and into the highlands, devastating wide areas of export and
food crops. y

In March 1811 the Cortes abolished tribute. Official notice of
this did not arrive in Guatemala until more than a year later,
but unofficial news circulated much sooner and filtered into the
highlands. Resistance to the tax grew apace. Confronted by

*In Guatemala, a ladino is someone of European or “national” culture,
whatever the individual’s racial makeup. The word carries, however, and this
was particularly the case in the late colonial period, the connotation of less
than pure Caucasian heritage.

growing protests from the communities, in April 1811 the
Audiencia, or high court, of Guatemala ordered a reduction in
tribute to pre-nivelacién levels. This response satisfied no one.
Indians were certain, not without reason given their past expe-
rience, that the Spanish tax officials, often in conjunction with
some of their own leaders, meant to cheat them. Unrest finally
forced crown officials to suspend collections in January 1812. In
May of that year the new constitution arrived in Guatemala. Two
of its provisions were of particular interest to the Indians. One
provision decreed that, henceforth, all native-born residents of
Spain and the empire not of African ancestry were full citizens
with equal rights. Gone was the Indian’s legal situation as a
second-class citizen or perpetual “minor” before the law. And,
article 339 of the constitution provided that all citizens be taxed
only according to their ability to pay. This provision confirmed,
or so it seemed at the time, the abolition of tribute. The Cortes
had key sections of the constitution translated into Indian lan-
guages and circulated these in the communities. Victoria Bricker,
in The Indian Christ, the Indian King, renders part of this expla-
nation as:

Now there is no one

Who has thought to say
That we are not Spaniards

all of us....
Beloved sons!

Open the pupils of your eyes
Now your tribute is gone

.

The Indians would now be liable for “Spanish taxes,” such as
the diezmo (tithe) and the alcabala (sales tax), from which they
had been exempt, but the hated tribute was gone.

The fortunes of war, however, soon reversed the situation yet
again. In May 1814, Ferdinand returned, tore up the constitution,
and reinstituted tribute at the higher nivelacién rates. The Audien-
cia published news of this in Guatemala in January 1815 and
began attempts to collect the tax in November. It is hardly to be
wondered that the Indians suspected a trick. Many refused to
pay. The highlands rustled with rumors. Resistance seems to
have been particularly strong in the villages around San Miguel
Totonicapan, chief town of the Totonicapan-Huehuetenango
province (much of present-day northwestern Guatemala) and
residence of the province’s alcalde mayor (governor), which had
suffered large increases in the nivelacién reforms. A savage riot,
linked to land disputes with the town of Solola and to tributes,
had exploded in 1813, resulting in the wounding of the alcalde
mayor. In 1816, in San Miguel itself, town officials, led by the
primer alcalde (chief town council member) Atanasio Tzul, flatly
refused to collect tribute. Tzul had long been a leader in efforts
to resist the tax. At the time, he was about fifty-five years old, a
peasant farmer, and in addition to being primer alcalde, was head
of the important local clan of Lincag. Tzul and his fellow officials
took up per tributary only four reales for the community fund
and 2.5 reales to support the priest.

By 1818 the new governor of Totonicapan-Huehuetenango,
Manuel José Lara, was finding himself under increasing pressure
from Guatemala City to collect overdue tribute. The towns of
his district were some fifteen thousand dollars in arrears; this
debt jumped to almost thirty thousand dollars by 1820. Most
obstinate were San Miguel, which had paid practically nothing,
the nearby towns of San Francisco el Alto, San Cristobal ‘Toton-
icapan, Momostenango, and Santa Maria Chiquimula, and, to
the north, Sacapulas, Cotzal, and Chajul. When his superiors
instituted legal proceedings against him, Lara protested that he
was powerless. Unceasingly, he claimed, he had crisscrossed the
highlands exhorting and threatening, but the towns either
appealed to the Audiencia or simply ignored his demands. Fur-
thermore, he complained, the Audiencia, worried about touching
off a general revolt, refused to allow him to punish offending
officials or communities. In Sacapulas, a severely frustrated Lara
pulled a knife_on a threatening crowd and had to flee for his
life. Ladino troops restored order but could not collect tribute
either. In Santa Maria Chiquimula a mob assaulted the local
priest for urging them to pay. The crisis, the Audiencia feared,
threatened to get out of hand and spread Totonicapan’s “noxious
example” to other areas of the highlands. Without the tribute,
government revenues, particularly the salaries of crown officials,
would dry up.

Despairing of Lara, the Audiencia in late 1818 turned to a
former governor of Totonicapan, Prudencio de Cozar, and
appointed him special comisario de orden (commissioner of order)
to bring the Indians to heel. Cozar’s career in Guatemala was
typical of that of many officials in the late colonial period. A
Spaniard, he entered the military as a cadet in 1775 and in
1780 advanced to officer. The early 1800s found him serving as
governor of Totonicapan-Huehuetenango. Following this gov-
ernorship, he reorganized and commanded the militia of the
region until 1813. After leaving royal service, Cozar filled vari-
ous offices on the city council of Quezaltenango, the largest
town in the western highlands and located some twenty miles
southwest of San Miguel Totonicapan. All of his activities since
1811, as he repeatedly pointed out, had been without official
salary.

Comisario Cozar visited town after town in Totonicapan-
Huehuetenango to explain and threaten, but he met with no
more success than had Lara. This already unpromising mission
became next to impossible with the arrival from Spain of the first
news of the 1820 liberal revolution and reinstatement of the 1812
constitution. Even after official publication of the document in
Guatemala in July 1820, however, disagreement continued
among crown Officials (as it has among writers on the topic since)
as to whether this ended tribute for a second time. The Audiencia
argued that, in the absence of a specific ruling, restoration of
the constitution did not end tribute and continued its attempts
to collect the tax. The Audiencia’s interpretation only reinforced
Indian suspicions and resistance, convincing many that tribute
probably had not been reinstated in 1815. Delegation after del-
egation from the highland towns visited Guatemala City to ask
the truth of the Audiencia; each received the same answer and
went away dissatisfied. San Miguel Totonicapan sent three del-
egations to the capital in the first months of 1820, at least one
of which was headed by Atanasio Tzul and by an individual
named Lucas Aguilar. Aguilar, about the same age of Tzul and,
like him, a small farmer, was also a longtime activist in antitribute
agitation and once had led a tumulto against the local priest over
the tax. But whereas Tzul was a member of the town’s hereditary
aristocracy, Aguilar was a macegual (commoner). He figured,
nevertheless, as an individual of considerable local importance
because of his wealth, his position as mayordomo (head) of the
important cofradéa, or religious brotherhood, of Santisimo Sacra-
mento, and his evident leadership qualities. The Audiencia told
Tzul and Aguilar that, as far as it knew, tribute remained in
effect and that even if it were to turn out that the constitution
did abolish the tax, back tribute for the period 1815-1820 would
still be due.

To understand the conflict about to turn violent in Totoni-
capan, it is necessary to understand the political organization of
the highland Indian towns. Several overlapping and intercon-
nected but distinct groups and institutions, commonly lumped
together by the Spanish as justicias (justices), ruled the villages.
The titular, if rarely de facto, head of the community was the
gobernador (governor), an Indian appointed by the alcalde mayor
to oversee the town in the interests of the colonial state. For this
position the Spanish selected, or claimed to select, individuals
from among the survivors of the preconquest hereditary town
aristocracies, identifiable remnants of which have existed in some
communities into the twentieth century. In these elite families,
males called principales (principal men) headed kinship groups
called parcialidades (clans), members of which commonly lived in
the same area and held property together. Parcialidades continued
to be particularly strong institutions in the Totonicapan area; the
town of San Miguel, for example, according to testimony at the
time, had five. In 1820, Tzul was first principal of the large
parcialidad of Lincag, but he was not the gobernador. Whatever
the supposed qualifications for this position, Spanish colonial
officials, in reality, made and unmade gobernadores with such little
regard for local sensibilities that by the late colonial period most
were obvious creatures of the Spanish rulers and commanded
little respect among the indigenous population.

Colonial law provided that each Indian or Spanish community
have a cabildo (town council) presided over by elected alcaldes
(council members). Although in theory these posts might be filled
by any male of the community, much more powerful costumbre
(custom) dictated that the hereditary principales, where they per-
sisted, dominate both the selection process and in the membership
of the town council. The alcaldes handled day-to-day administra-
tion and justice within the village, collected taxes, apportioned
labor for community needs and to meet the demands of_ the
Spanish, and generally mediated contacts between the town and
the outside world.

Also important in the village structure were the cofradias. Each
was a lay religious brotherhood devoted to a specific saint or
religious figure. Men occupied the major offices, although women
assisted their husbands and sometimes held minor or subordinate
posts. In 1820, San Miguel Totonicapan had eighteen Indian
cofradias.


Cofradia Capital Cofradia Capital

Santisima Trinidad $50 Las Animas $24
Santa Cruz $50 de la Llagas $46
Santa Catarina $53 Santa Ana $28
Rosa $46 Guadalupe $80
San Francisco $37 San Nicolas $52
San Antonio $31 Chiantla $100
Senior de Esquipulas $65 Santisimo Sacramento $64
Merecedes $45 Concepcién $45
Santa Cecilia $132 Archangel none-

Members joined voluntarily and contributed their time and
money to adorn the saint's image and to celebrate its fiesta with
church services, firecrackers, music, and ritual drunkenness. Co-
fradia capitales (funds) served too as reserves to help meet com-
munity emergencies or expenses, such as sending delegations to
the capital to inquire about tribute. Service to a cofradia, especially
as the mayordomo, brought an individual prestige in the com-
munity, and maceguales as well as hereditary principales might hold
the post as head. The important qualifications were devotion to
the cult and the time and the money necessary to undertake the
often elaborate ceremonies and ritual connected with a given
image.

Taken together the offices of the cabildo and the cofradia made
up, and still make up, the much-studied cargo system, common
throughout much of Mesoamerica, in which different cofradias
assume the financial responsibility for sponsoring various relig-
ious festivals. Those persons who served successfully in a series
of civil and religious offices entered in their advanced years into
the category of “elder” of the town. The usual name for these
elders in Guatemalan indigenous communities is also principales.
A self-selecting and self-perpetuating institution, the body of
elders had responsibility, along with the hereditary principales, if
these existed, for selection of the alcaldes, for advising on all
aspects of community life, and, in general, for the preservation
and perpetuation of values and customary practices. The double
meaning of principal would have confused no one in Totonicapan,
as the specific content of the word would be obvious in the
context of a given individual. A number of men, including Atan-
asio Tzul, had the status of principal in both senses.

Such were the justicias with whom Alcalde Mayor Lara and
Comisario Cozar had had so little success. The Audiencia finally
ordered Cozar to “pacify” the towns and put an end to the
resistance. In March and again in April 1820, Cozar ordered
Tzul, Aguilar, and the other rebellious authorities of San Miguel
to appear in Quezaltenango to explain themselves. They refused,
saying that if Cozar wished to talk to them he could come to
Totonicapan, but they threatened to cut off his head if he did!
Clearly, the alcalde mayor had little control over even his chief
town.

In the early months of 1820 it was, in any event, not so much
San Miguel but the neighboring town of Santa Maria Chiquimula
that took the leading role in actively resisting tax demands. Most
of the towns around Totonicapan were land poor, but Santa
Maria’s situation was particularly difficult. With a growing pop-
ulation and few resources, the aggressive Chiquimulas invaded
or rented the lands of their more fortunate neighbors, migrated
to distant townships in search of land and work, and engaged in
long-distance trade. They were not about to pay unnecessary
taxes.

After repeated clashes with their own town authorities, on
March 17, 1820, some two hundred inhabitants of Santa Maria
Chiquimula descended on San Miguel Totonicapan to inquire
yet again of Alcalde Mayor Lara about tribute. They claimed to
know that a paper recently had arrived from the capital sup-
porting their position and demanded to see it. Because Lara was
out of town, the Chiquimulas, soon joined by a large number of
Indians from San Miguel led by Lucas Aguilar, congregated in
front of the lieutenant governor's house, yelling that Lara was a
robber and demanding to see the document. The lieutenant
governor, with a howling mob at his door, ordered the scribe of
the town council to read the only newly arrived order he could
find, which dealt not with tribute but with taxes for the support
of the priest at Santa Maria Chiquimula. Not satisfied, Aguilar
“took the voice of the crowd” and threatened the lieutenant
governor, and the mob roughed up the scribe, saying that he
either was lying or could not read. Several justicias who sought
to calm the Indians found it necessary to take refuge in the
lieutenant governor’s house. The crowd then dispersed, the Chi-
quimulas returning to their village, and the residents of San
Miguel going to Aguilar’s house to discuss what to do. When the
lieutenant governor learned, or so his informants warned him,
that the Indians planned to kill him that night “because they
wanted no ladinos in the town,” he bundled himself and his family
out of San Miguel.

The conflict simmered. Cozar, with little force available to back
up his threats, adhered to the standard axiom of Spanish colonial
government: do little, and that slowly. Aguilar and Tzul, for their
part, continued to meet with groups from other towns to discuss
the situation, and, periodically, they clashed openly with Lara;
neither side, however, seemed able or willing to force the issue.

Suddenly, in early summer, the situation at Totonicapan
exploded, touched off by the July 5 arrival in San Miguel of “the
papers of the constitution.” Apparently, the villagers were expect-
ing something, for they went out to meet the mail carrier arriving
from Guatemala City and brought him into town accompanied
by “riotous” celebrations. One of the most intriguing, unanswered
questions about the rebellion concerns the exact nature of these
“papers,” to which various participants refer but never describe.
The Spanish at the time, and some writers since, believed that
the leaders of the outbreak had contact with proindependence
agitators in the capital and that these papers might have been
such a link. But crown officials who questioned the leaders of
the uprising after its repression, although clearly aware of the
existence of the papers and interested in connections to Guate-
mala City, failed to pursue the topic. Who sent the papers? Of
what did they consist? One source speaks of five printed items.
Probably the papers were copies of the constitution, together
with the explanations of key passages earlier translated into
Indian languages. Individuals or a group of proindependence
enthusiasts in the capital may well have sought to stir up trouble
for the Spanish authorities in the countryside by encouraging
the Indians’ just complaints. What Tzul, Aguilar, and their sup-
porters said the papers were (remember, only the scribe of the
cabildo and perhaps a few others among the Indians, but not
Tzul or Aguilar, could read) was confirmation of the end of
tribute.

The papers proved too, the leaders argued, and here they
more clearly erred, that the Crown never had reestablished trib-
ute. To the cries of “thief,” Alcalde Mayor Lara fled the town the
next day for Quezaltenango and the protection of Comisario Cosar.
Aguilar and Tzul, with their supporters, cornered several justicias
who had counseled cooperation with the Spanish and upbraided
them for stealing from the people. When the justicias denied the
charge, the rioters beat them and threatened to “rip out their
guts.” Tzul took the staff of office of the gobernador for himself
and gave that of the second alcalde to Antonio Sitalan. Later,
Sitalan recalled, under interrogation, that he had tried to turn
down the “honor,” but when Aguilar questioned his manhood,
asking whether “he was a man with balls,” he had had to accept
the post.

The power and pretensions of the rebels grew quickly. Groups
of Indians came from the surrounding towns to confer with Tzul
and Aguilar; armed with clubs, they stayed to guard the leaders’
houses. Aguilar ordered the justicias of San Francisco el Alto, San
Andrés Xecul, and other villages to appear in Totonicapan and
explain why they had continued to collect tribute. Surrounded
by bodyguards, Aguilar berated these officials and demanded
that they return the money to the people. He had them hung
up and whipped “until they passed out.” Most of Aguilar’s victims
later claimed that they had had no intention of obeying his orders
but that upon returning to their towns they were threatened by
mobs and forced to give up what tribute funds they possessed.
Aguilar also instituted a tax of two reales each on all married
men, to repay, he claimed, community and cofradia funds spent
pursuing the tribute question.

While all agreed that Aguilar was “principal head” of the
uprising, and several witnesses even labeled Tzul his “pawn,” it
was Atanasio Tzul who took the crown of “king.” Or did he?
Tzul, not surprisingly, later denied that any coronation had
occurred. Bricker, in her treatment of the revolt, accepts this
statement, arguing that since the Indians never wavered in pro-
fessing loyalty to the Spanish king they could not very well have
raised another king. Yet Bricker’s interpretation presumes an
elaborated theory of unitary kingship, which the Indians almost
certainly did not have. Rather, they seemed to find no difficulty
with the idea of “subkings”; for example, while Tzul ruled Toto-
nicapan, Justo Rainos claimed to be “king” of San Francisco el
Alto. As head of one of the largest parcialidades in the town, as
a hereditary noble (even if not, as some have suggested, in any
identifiable sense a direct descendant of the Quiché kings), and
with a long history of leading resistance to tribute, Tzul was the
logical candidate. Almost certainly, then, Tzul did put on “the
crown of Saint Joseph,” borrowed from the saint's statue in the
town church; his wife, Felipa Soc, donned that of Saint Cecilia,
obtained from the image of the cofradia of that name. Tzul’s
regalia—Spanish three-cornered hat, pants, shoes, and sword—
he took, with no apparent conscious irony, from an available
costume for the Dance of the Conquest, a dance performed by
Indians on festival days and that commemorates the defeat of
the Indians by the Spanish conquerors.

Real power, however, lay with Lucas Aguilar. It was Aguilar
who “raised the cofradéas” and led the crowds; his son carried his
invitations and orders to the neighboring towns and his messages
to Guatemala City. Delegations from other towns visited him
chiefly, and it was at his house that meetings took place and that:
doubting justicias and ladinos were interrogated and punished
(one claimed to have had his ear cut off). It is of interest, and
probably indicative of their perspective, that Aguilar, Tzul, and
others spent one evening trying to repair a paper picture of King
Ferdinand. Aguilar took the title of “president” under Tzul, the
king. This, of course, followed the pattern of titles within the
Spanish imperial system in which the president of the Audiencia
of Guatemala served under the king of Spain. President was the
highest title to which Aguilar, as a commoner, might logically
aspire, and it was an office, within the experience of the Indians,
of great day-to-day power. The king might rule, but like God,
was far away, whereas the president was an all-too-concrete
reality.

The flight of Lara and the coronation of Tzul forced Cozar
to take more active steps. Even so, he could not act precipitously
because he lacked an adequate armed force to move against the
towns. The colonial government of Guatemala maintained few
regular army troops. Most of these it stationed in the capital to
maintain order and on the north coast for defense against the
British and pirates. To control the countryside the state relied
on a militia made up of some Spanish and creole officers but
filled out mainly with small-town and rural ladinos and castas
drawn to the units by fueros (legal privileges granted to those
connected with the military). The core of the forces available to
Cozar were four battalions of town militia from Quezaltenango.
These he claimed to have organized, or reorganized, himself
between 1811 and 1813, but, he now lamented, they had been
allowed to fall into disarray in subsequent years. It took time to
get the troops into shape and to arm them with muskets from
state warehouses. To reinforce these battalions, Cozar called up
the militia of the nearby towns of Santa Cruz del Quiché and
Solola and from the /adino settlements of Salcaja and San Carlos
Sija. These soldiers came with what arms they had on hand,
typically pikes, swords, and machetes, and a few shotguns. In all,
Cozar put together a force of some one thousand men.

After several weeks of preparation, Cozar moved on San Miguel
on August 3 from four directions simultaneously. To cover his
flank and provide an avenue of retreat if necessary, he left a
detachment of fifty men of the Salcaja and Sija militias at the
junction of the road to San Francisco el Alto. Entering San
Miguel, the militia troops encountered hostile crowds but little
active resistance. Their commander went to Tzul’s house first
and then Aguilar’s, where the Indians waited. Most of the Indians
spoke no Spanish, so the commander could not make himself
understood, and he dared not enter the leader’s house for fear
of being cut off from his men and killed. Instead, the Spanish
recruited the town priest, who seems to have remained in San
Miguel throughout the uprising without any problem, to get up
on a table in front of the crowd and explain to the Indians in
their own language that they did have to pay tribute. This news
was not well received; one witness spoke of a shower of rocks.
At that moment, news arrived of an attack by the rearguard.

The militia left at the road junction had taken up position in
a strategic pass. Soon, however, hundreds of Indians from San
Cristobal Totonicapan and San Francisco el Alto congregated on
the hills above them and then attacked, hurling rocks down on
the soldiers. Soon all of the militia members were wounded. The
attacking villagers forced them to give way, falling back toward
Totonicapan until they met reinforcements rushing to their res-
cue. With these the militia counterattacked and captured several
of their tormentors. Why San Francisco and San Cristobal had
attacked the troops when the Indians of San Miguel and of other
communities did not is a mystery. The incident does make clear,
however, the lack of coordination between the towns and the
indigenous population’s evident failure to prepare for what they
must have realized would be the Spanish response to their
rebellion.

The events that followed were later hotly disputed by the
parties involved. The troops “denuded” San Miguel, its inhabi-
tants claimed, carrying off “pots and pans, wheat, corn, pigs, and
chickens.” They dragged people from their houses and put nooses
around their necks to terrorize them into revealing hidden weap-
ons or, of probably greater immediate interest to the troopers,
more loot. Militia members bayoneted one woman repeatedly,
reportedly because she attacked them with a stick of firewood.
She later died, but Cozar denied any necessary connection
between the two events. The Indians protested that at least three
villagers died from such abuse and complained that the priest
had refused them “the holy oils.”

The militia whipped dozens of Indians, as exemplary punish-
ment and in pursuit of hidden animals and goods. They “gave
them the leather,” one soldier recalled, for two days, and some
Indians were said to have received as many as three hundred
lashes. Few of the leaders tried to escape, and Tzul and Aguilar
fell prisoner without resistance. Either they did not understand
the gravity of their offense, which, given their past experience
and in spite of their protests of innocence, seems highly unlikely,
or, as Severo Martinez Pelaez suggests in his book Motines de
Indios, they accepted responsibility for their actions and the pun-
ishment that would certainly follow as an inevitable consequence
of their role as community leaders. The purpose of the uprising
was to call the Crown’s attention to the real and perceived abuses
of Spanish and Indian officials. In this the villagers succeeded
but, that done, someone had to “take the fall” in order to maintain
the legitimacy of the system. One individual who did escape was
the town’s scribe, one of the few people who could have read
and testified to the contents of the famous papers.

The following day on August 4, Cozar sent thirty-four pris-
oners, including Tzul and Aguilar, in chains to Quezaltenango
for trial. What is striking in the leaders’ testimony is their will-
ingness to incriminate each other. Each claimed to be ignorant
of his supposed offenses, and each sought to shift the blame for
the disturbances to others. Aguilar, the first to be interrogated,
said that he did not know why he had been arrested but guessed
that it had to do with the soldiers finding some papers, about
which he knew nothing, in his house. He allowed the use of his
house for meetings at the request of the principales because it
was large, he said, but he had nothing to do with any whippings
of Indian officials or attacks on ladinos. Tzul, for his part, pro-
tested that it was not he but Aguilar who had ordered the other
towns to stop paying tribute and who had had the justicias beaten.
Tzul denied crowning himself and said that he and others of the
principales had taken the staffs of office from the gobernador and
second alcalde only because they had failed in their duties. It was
Aguilar who had stirred up the towns; they sent delegations to
him with money, for what purpose Tzul did not know. Aguilar’s
son professed to know nothing of his father’s activities, and
although he admitted calling the alcalde mayor a thief, he claimed
he had been drunk when he had done so. In part, Aguilar’s son’s
denial played to Spanish prejudices, which assumed a childlike
and stupid Indian. But, as Severo Martinez points out, it may
also reflect the relatively unpremeditated, spontaneous nature of
the outbreak itself, which limited the opportunity for “revolu-
tionary solidarity” to develop.

During the tumulto, class conflict bubbled to the surface in
several of the communities. Aggrieved principales, abused by Agui-
lar and his accomplices, had hastened to tell the Spanish after
repression of the uprising that the maceguales of their towns had
supported the sedicién enthusiastically: “the very same commoners
held the bull fights and shouted ‘Long live Lucas Aguilar who
is our king.” The appeal of the Totonicapan uprising for the
masses of the community had been abolition of tribute, a tax
from which justicias not uncommonly had exempted themselves.
Indeed, some justicias had profited from skimming the tribute
before turning it over to the Spanish or had cooperated with
Spanish officials in coerced labor schemes and the repartimiento
de efectos (forced sale of unneeded goods at inflated prices). It is
hardly to be wondered that given the opportunity the populace
had beaten the principales of. San Cristobol Totonicapan “with
sticks” or that these officials had reported the attacks to the
Spanish with relish, in hopes of revenge. Not all local officials
had worked for the community as singlemindedly as Tzul; even
in the case of Aguilar there remain questions concerning not
only abuses of power but also what happened to the monies
collected from the two-reales head tax.

Crown officials at the time, and a number of writers-subse-
quently, have attempted to link the events in San Miguel to
designs for political independence from Spain. Daniel Contreras,
in one of the first studies of the tumulto, concluded that “the
rebellious Indians of Totonicapan in 1820 ought to be understood
as part of a whole process, the process that culminated in the
proclamation of independence.” He has a point but a limited
one. Certainly the decade-long conflict over tribute contributed
to the general unrest that prefaced independence. The events at
San Miguel thus were both a product and a cause of this unrest.
But the uprising clearly did not have independence from Spain
as its goal. It was in most ways a typical colonial riot against the
abuses of Spanish and Indian officials. The idea of a “king” seems
to have emerged chiefly because the uprising lasted much longer
than was normal in these cases. And it lasted longer because of
the unsettled condition of the colony brought on by the situation
in Spain, by the independence revolts under way to the north
and south, and by the decade of resistance to tribute collection.
Whereas tax rebels in the early part of the century found them-
selves quickly rounded up and shipped off to serve stiff sentences
in the penal fortresses at Omoa on the Honduras coast and in
the isolated Petén, between 1818 and 1820 Guatemala’s Audiencia
moved slowly, fearing a race war and independence movement
such as had erupted to the north. Most witnesses remembered
that the festivities in Totonicapan included vivas for King Fer-
dinand. Indeed, and only slightly disingenuously, the tumulto’s
jailed leaders claimed not to understand why they had been
imprisoned simply for celebrating the king’s constitution.

Why did Totonicapan’s revolt not develop into a broader
Indian and casta uprising such as had occurred in Peru in the
1780s or in Mexico from 1708 to 1713 and during the nineteenth
century? Certainly the leaders tried, sending out calls to join
them not only to the towns of the district of Totonicapan but
also to Indian communities in Solola and Quezaltenango. How-
ever, the Indians themselves were a product of the Spanish
colonial system or, more accurately, a product of the interaction
over several centuries of this system with indigenous institutions
and values. In Guatemala, this limited the Indians’ perspective
to the pueblo de indios (local community) and regularly blocked
or destroyed any institution above the municipality not under
direct Spanish control. Indian villages of highland Guatemala
remained isolated from each other by language and dialect, by
costume, by custom, and by the hostilities engendered in centuries
of conflict, chiefly over land, among themselves. What drew a
broad range of Indians to the 1708-1713 Tzotzil-Tzeltal revolt
in Chiapas and the nineteenth-century Caste War in Yucatan,
for example, and, more importantly, what held them together
over time, was messianic religion. This unifying element was
lacking in Totonicapan. Contreras suggests as a possible substitute
Tzul as a descendant of the last Quiché kings. A similar claim
seems to have been effective in eighteenth-century Peru, but
there is scant evidence that the Totonicapan rebels thought in
such terms and even less that the other towns found the idea
appealing or convincing. In any event, only the villages in the
immediate vicinity of Totonicapan answered Aguilar’s call, and
even several of these exhibited doubts about an Indian “king.”

What happened to the leaders jailed in Quezaltenango? Tra-
dition has it that they either paid with their lives or gained release
only after independence. In fact, their fate was less dramatic.
Late in 1820 and again in March 1821, the prisoners applied for
pardons. They denied any intention of disloyalty, and they put
forward a calculated explanation of their actions, claiming, “[As
we were] born in the countryside and raised accustomed only to
the crudest circumstances and like our parents used only to being
with animals, it is not possible that with this sort of upbringing
we could distinguish right from wrong and for this reason we
should not suffer the fate of a civilized man.” On March 22,
1821, the Audiencia granted pardons to Aguilar, Tzul, and var-
ious of the others still in jail. This is in dramatic contrast to the
harsh penalties passed out to earlier tax rebels and obviously
reflects the uncertain climate of the last year of the Spanish
colony of Guatemala. Alcalde Mayor Lara protested bitterly, saying
that the Indians sought their freedom only in order to return to
San Miguel Totonicapan to seek revenge against him. Cozar
expressed fear for his life if he had to return to Totonicapan to
try again to collect tributes. And the inhabitants of the town
openly threatened that, once the troops left, they would wreak
vengeance on any of their fellows who had cooperated with the
Spanish.

SOURCES

The chief sources for this chapter are original or primary
documents in the Archivo General de Centro América in Gua-
temala City. These include the interrogation records of Tzul,
Aguilar, and their compatriots and the reports of Cozar and Lara
to the Audiencia. Given the usual bulk of colonial judicial records,
the court proceedings are surprisingly sketchy, perhaps yet
another indication of the weakened condition of the state.
Victoria Reifler Bricker includes a useful account of the upris-
ing in The Indian Christ, the Indian King: The Historical Substrate
of Maya Myth and Ritual (Austin, 1981); and in Spanish there is
J. Daniel Contreras’s Una rebelién indigena en el partido de Toto-
nicapdan en 1820 (2d printing, Guatemala, 1968). Severo Martinez
Pelaez treats the rebellion topically, together with a dozen others,
in the first chapters of Motines de Indios (la violencia colonial en
Centroamérica y Chiapas) (Puebla, n.d.) and promises in the future
a chapter specifically on the events at Totonicapan.

Good treatments and bibliographies in English of late colonial
Guatemala include those in W. George Lovell, Conquest and Sur-
vival in Colonial Guatemala: A Historical Geography of the Cuchumatan
Highlands, 1500-1821 (Kingston, Ontario, 1985); Thomas Thor-
stein Veblen, “The Ecological, Cultural, and Historical Bases of
Forest Preservation in Totonicapan, Guatemala” (Ph.D. diss.,
University of California, Berkeley, 1975); and Miles Wortman,
Government and Society in Central America, 1680-1840 (New York,
1982). William B. Taylor’s Drinking, Homicide, and Rebellion in
Colonial Mexican Villages (Stanford, 1979), although it does not
deal specifically with Totonicapan, sets the rebellion in
perspective.


